# "hello world!"

Let's start from the simplest configuration, the classic "hello world!":

```lua
Listen "8080" {
    echo = "hello, world!\n"
}
```

You should have seen it at [install ducument](1.install.md). It responses
"hello, world!\n" for each request. Let's look in it now.


# It's Lua

Firstly, it's in [Lua](https://lua.org).
h2tpd embeds Lua, so Lua is the most natural choice for configuration.

Lua is powerful but also simple. It's even simpler if just for configuration.
Compared with other configuration languages, Lua has the following features:

- Single line comments start with `--`, and block comments start with `--[[`
  and run until the corresponding `]]`.

- Table type can mix array members and key-value entries. Constructors `{}`
  create and initialize tables, where members are separated by `,` or `;`.

- Function type is supported, which gives great flexibility to the configuration.


# Listen

Let's continue on the "hello world" configuration.

The first word `Listen` creates a Listen scope. It accepts one or more addresses
to listen on, and finally one table constructor to define this scope.

In this example, there is only one address, `"8080"`, which tells the h2tpd to
listen on port 8080.

The following table constructor contains only one key-value entry, which defines
the responding action.


# Scopes

h2tpd has 3 scopes: Listen, Host, and Path. They are hierarchical.

Listen is the top level. There can be multiple Listens in one configuration.
Host appears in Listen scope only. There can be multiple Hosts in one Listen
scope as virtual servers.
Path appears in Host scope only. It's similar to Nginx's `location`.

Host and Path are optional, as shown in the example.

Each configuration command belongs to one specific scope. For example `networks`
belongs to Listen, and `echo` belongs to Path.

The high-level commands can not appear in low-level scope because it does not make sense.
However low-level commands can appear in high-level scope to define the default
value for all the low-level scopes under this high-level scope.

Here is an example:

```lua
-- a slightly more complex example

Listen "8080" {

    networks = {    -- networks appear only here
        read_timeout = 10,
        write_timeout = 20,
    },

    error_log = { level = "error" },   -- default for all Paths under this Listen

    Host "*" {
        echo = "hello world!\n",   -- default for all Paths under this Host

        Path "/hangzhou/" {
            error_log = { level = "debug" },   -- overwrite the "error"
            echo = "hello hangzhou!\n"   -- overwrite the "hello world!"
        },

        Path "/wonderland/" {
            echo = { "There is no wonderland :(\n",   -- overwrite the "hello world!"
                status_code = 404,    -- also set status code
            },
        },

        Path "/" {
            -- inherit the "hello world!"
        }
    }
}
```


# A grammar sugar

In the last example, the value of `echo` at Path "/wonderland/" is not a
string any more but a table. In fact, table type is the complete form for `echo`.
Assigning a string to `echo` is a grammar sugar.
You can omit the table constructor and set a member directly, if

- the value table accepts array members (either single or multiple),
- the type of array member is not table again,
- you want to set only one array member,
- you do not want to set any key-value entry.


# Lua's variables

Lua supports variables, of course. It's a programming language after all.
We use variables as constant more. We are configuration after all.

Most of the time there is no difference to use variables or not. The
following 2 examples work in the exact same way:

```lua
-- define some virtual hosts
local vhost_img = Host "img.example.com" {
    ...
}
local vhost_music = Host "music.example.com" {
   ...
}

Listen "8080" {
    -- list all virtual hosts here
    vhost_img,
    vhost_music,
}
```

```lua
Listen "8080" {
    Host "img.example.com" {
        ...
    }
    Host "music.example.com" {
       ...
    }
}
```

However, it makes a difference if the variable is a table and referred by multiple times.

```lua
Listen "8081" {
    proxy = { { "127.0.0.1:12345" } }
}
Listen "8082" {
    proxy = { { "127.0.0.1:12345" } }
}
```

```lua
local backend = { "127.0.0.1:12345" }  -- define a variable
Listen "8081" {
    proxy = { backend }
}
Listen "8082" {
    proxy = { backend }
}
```

The `proxy` needs an upstream argument which is a table. So here the grammar
sugar in invalid because of the 2nd condition listed above.

In the former configuration example, there are 2 upstream instances.
They are totally independent.

While in the latter example, there is only 1 upstream instance, and the 2 Listens
refers to it both. So they share the upstream's connection pool, the statistics,
the health checking, and so on.

Another way of sharing is the default value defined at higher level scope. Here is an example:

```lua
Listen "8080" {
    Host "*" {
        limit_req = {
            key = function()    -- limit by user_id or client_address
                local user_id = h2d.get_cookies().id
                if user_id then
                    return user_id
                end
                return h2d.client_address()
            end,
            rate = 10,
            burst = 100,
            punish = 60,
        },
        Path "/internal/" {
            limit_req = { rate = 0 }, -- disable limit_req
            ...
        },
        Path "/a/" {
            ...
        },
        Path "/b/" {
            ...
        },
        Path "/" {
            ...
        },
    }
}
```

`limit_req` belongs to the Path scope. It is assigned in Host scope in this example,
so it takes effect for all Paths under this Host. And all Paths under this
Hosts shares this `limit_req` instance.
One exception is Path `"/internal/"` which has its own `limit_req` that
overwrites the default one.


# Function

TODO


# Dynamic

TODO
